dplyr 1.1.0: Per-operation grouping (#619)
tidyverse/tidyverse.org: content/blog/dplyr-1-1-0-per-operation-grouping/index.Rmd

---
output: hugodown::hugo_document
slug: dplyr-1-1-0-per-operation-grouping
title: "dplyr 1.1.0: Per-operation grouping"
date: 2023-02-01
author: Davis Vaughan
description: >
    dplyr now supports an experimental per-operation grouping syntax. This serves as an
    alternative to `group_by()` and always returns an ungrouped data frame, meaning that you
    never need to remember to `ungroup()`.
photo:
  url: https://www.pexels.com/photo/fruit-stand-375897/
  author: Clem Onojeghuo
categories: [package] 

> tags: [dplyr]

Reviewer: I just remembered we used a dplyr-1-0-0 tag (https://www.tidyverse.org/tags/dplyr-1-0-0/) for 1.0.0; we should do the same here, and you can add a link to each blog post to see all the posts.

editor_options: 
  chunk_output_type: console
---

Today we are going to look at one of the major new features in [dplyr 1.1.0](https://dplyr.tidyverse.org/news/index.html#dplyr-110), per-operation grouping with [`.by`/`by`](https://dplyr.tidyverse.org/reference/dplyr_by.html).

> Per-operation grouping is an experimental alternative to `group_by()` which is only active within a single dplyr verb.

Reviewer: Inspired by data.table.

This is useful if you need to follow up with additional grouped operations (with the exact same grouping columns), but many people follow this `mutate()` with an `ungroup()`.

If we only need the totals, we could also use `summarise()`, which peels off 1 layer of grouping by default:

```{r}
transactions |>
  group_by(company, year) |>
  summarise(total = sum(revenue))
```

Here the grouping of the output isn't exactly the same as the input, but we still consider this persistent grouping because some of the groups outlive the verb they were used with.

## Per-operation grouping with `.by`/`by`

In dplyr 1.1.0, we've added an alternative to `group_by()` known as [`.by`](https://dplyr.tidyverse.org/reference/dplyr_by.html) that introduces the idea of *per-operation* grouping:

```{r}
transactions |>
  mutate(total = sum(revenue), .by = c(company, year))

transactions |>
  summarise(total = sum(revenue), .by = c(company, year))
```

There are a few things about `.by` worth noting:

-   The result is always ungrouped, regardless of the number of grouping columns.
    With `.by`, you never need to remember to call `ungroup()`.

> -   We used tidy-select to group by multiple columns.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   We used [tidyselect](https://tidyselect.r-lib.org/reference/language.html) to group by multiple columns.
```

-   `.by` doesn't sort grouping keys.
    `group_by()` always sorts keys in ascending order, which affects the results of verbs like `summarise()`.

The last point might seem strange, but consider what happens if we preferred our transactions data in order by descending year so that the most recent transactions are at the top.

```{r}
transactions2 <- transactions |>
  arrange(company, desc(year))

transactions2
```

```{r}
# Note that `group_by()` re-ordered
transactions2 |>
  group_by(company, year) |>
  summarise(total = sum(revenue), .groups = "drop")

# But `.by` used whatever order was already there
transactions2 |>
  summarise(total = sum(revenue), .by = c(company, year))
```

Notice that `.by` doesn't re-sort the grouping keys.
Instead, the previous call to `arrange()` is "respected" in the summary (this is also useful in combination with the new `.locale` argument to `arrange()`).

We expect that most code won't depend on the ordering of these group keys, but it is worth keeping in mind if you are switching to `.by`.

> If you did rely on sorted group keys, you'll need to explicitly call `arrange()` either before or after the call to `summarise(.by =)`.

Reviewer: We may add a new argument to control this behaviour in the future?
